# Attention

Since the project demonstrated its necessity, a strategic decision was made to further develop the product using a new technology stack based on various technical considerations. No new changes will be made here. We have opened several new repositories for further development:

- [Mir Commander](https://github.com/mircmd/mircmd-app)
- [Mir Commander Chemistry Plugins](https://github.com/mircmd/mircmd-chemistry-plugins)

# Mir Commander

The primary goal of this project is the creation of a graphical user interface (GUI) for scientific modeling
using the [Mir](https://mir.vishnevskiy.group) language and [UNEX](https://unex.vishnevskiy.group) program.
UNEX is well-established software for molecular structure refinement.
Accordingly, Mir Commander is able to visualize molecular structures as well as other types of numerical data.

Currently, we are focused on the very basic functionality that allows visualizing molecules from files in the standard XYZ format.

## Development

### Linux/Mac

As a prerequisite, you have to create a virtual environment and install the required packages (in the command line):

```shell
make init
```

In case of problems with finding the default expected version of Python, you may want to indicate your version explicitly, for example:

```shell
PYTHON=python3.13 make init
```

The development version of Mir Commander can now be started as

```shell
./mircmd
```

### Windows

In Windows, you may need to first install Python3 and Git.
Then, in a similar manner as for Linux, it is best to work in a virtual environment.
The first steps are (run in `cmd` from the top-level directory of the repository):

```shell
python -m venv .venv
.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
pip install uv
uv sync --active --all-groups
```

Mir Commander can now be started from the command line in the virtual environment as:

```shell
.venv\Scripts\mircmd"
```

To exit from the virtual environment, run:

```shell
.venv\Scripts\deactivate
```

### Translation

To generate translation ts-file(s), run `generate_i18n.sh` (in Linux/macOS).
If at least one ts-file is updated, you need to generate binary translation qm-files using `ts_to_qm.sh` (in Linux/macOS).

### Resources

We use external resource files and load them at runtime with the `QResource.registerResource` function as described in the
[Qt documentation](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/resources.html#external-resource-files).
The generation of required binary resource files is done, for example, as `make resources` (macOS/Linux) or `.\resources.cmd` (Windows).

This is opposite to the commonly used scheme in PySide, where Python modules are created from `qrc` files by the `pyside6-rcc` program.
We avoid this because of two issues: (a) resources are loaded together with module loading, and
(b) the data are duplicated in Python and in the Qt library.

### Build dist

Before building, make sure that you clean old build files. If you do not do this, the dist may be corrupted.

- `make dist-mac` – Build for macOS. Host is macOS
- `make dist-linux` - Build for Linux. Host is Linux
- `make dist-linux-docker-amd64` - Build for Linux. Host is any OS that support Docker
- `make dist-linux-docker-arm64` - Build for Linux. Host is any OS that support Docker
- `.\dist_msi.cmd` – Build for Windows. Host is Windows

#### Icon conversion

To convert the application icon from SVG to PNG format, use the following command:

```shell
rsvg-convert -d 300 -p 300 -w 256 -h 256 resources/icons/app.svg -o resources/icons/app.png
```

### GUI Design

The creation and adjustment of all GUI elements is coded manually.
We do not use Qt Designer and `ui` files because of several reasons:

- this way is not flexible enough and Qt Designer does not allow full manipulation of GUI elements,
- the Python code autogenerated by the `uic` utility is usually excessive,
- import commands in the generated Python code do not take into account paths to resource modules.

### Code style

In the source code we stick to the principles similar to those described in [PEP 8 – Style Guide for Python Code](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/):

- For class names, the [Camel case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camel_case) style is used, like `VerySpecificClass`.
- For variables, methods, functions, and modules, we use [Snake case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case) style, for example `my_method()`.
- Note that private literals must start with the underscore (_) character, e.g., `_private_variable` or `_private_method()`.
- Public interfaces must use [Type Hints](https://peps.python.org/pep-0484/).

Other principles:

- Prefer string interpolation `f"parameter={par}"` over string `format()` method.
- Instead of `print()` you should obtain a `logger` by calling `logging.getLogger(__name__)` in the beginning of the module and then use the loggers methods `info()`, `debug()`, `warning()`, `error()` and `exception()`.
- Use `pathlib.Path` instead of `os.path`.
- Do not leave commented-out code as an idea, information, or work for the future. This just leads to littering of the project.
